$Id: CWI_README,v 1.26 2015/02/28 00:16:03 neill Exp $

Copyright (c) 2014, California Institute of Technology.  All rights reserved.


        KCWI Data Extraction and Reduction Pipeline (KDERP) CWI_README


Tenth Beta release; Version: 0.2.9 Date: 2015/02/27

NOTE: See '---NEW---' note below on using CWI data with kcwi_quick.pro.

These notes are instructions for how to create KCWI-like headers in CWI
images so they will work in the KCWI pipeline.

The basic outline of the procedure is to create a file called hdrfix.txt in
the raw image directory (or, better still in a directory with a copy of the
raw data) which is read in by CWI_FIX_HEADERS in IDL.  This program uses
the mapping specified in hdrfix.txt to update or create the keywords in the
headers of each image.  The images are specified as a list of image numbers
and the image file specifications are assumed to be of the form
imageXXXXX.fits, where the XXXXX is replaced with the five digit zero padded
image sequence number.

This process has been greatly automated by the latest CWI observing scripts
which write out a *.info file for each image (except for bias images).
There is a new routine called CWI_FORMAT_INFO that will read in the *.info
files and generate the header modification input file required by
CWI_FIX_HEADERS.  Not all the required data are available in the *.info
files, so the user will be queried for information and an ancillary file
called allhdr.txt will be included.  There may still be some editing of the
output hdrfix.txt required, but it has been greatly reduced by the use of
the *.info files and the CWI_FORMAT_INFO routine.  The description below
gives the basic procedures for modifying the headers.

First let's start with gathering the keyword information.  After this we'll
describe how to create the hdrfix.txt file.

1. Gather header keyword values for each image:

Very important: Take good observing notes!

In order to associate calibration images with object images, certain basic
configuration keywords must appear in the image headers.  To make this
happen, there must be a record of the configuration settings for each
image.  This has been mostly automated by using the *.info files, but it is
still a good idea to take accurate notes just in case.

In particular, it is important to log which image numbers correspond to sky
observations.  It is also very important to log the final outcome of any
nod-and-shuffle scripts that were executed.  You'll need to specify which
image numbers correspond to aborted nod-and-shuffle observation in order to
recover any useful data from them.  If any of the scripts were aborted
while observing the sky portion of the script, this must be noted.  These
type of aborted nod-and-shuffle observation have the sky and object frames
in a different, non-standard location and this must be flagged in order for
the pipeline to handle these correctly.

Now we list individual keywords and what they mean.

The first set of keywords that must be set are the CCD geometry keywords.
Typically, these will be the same for a given run, or at least the same for
a given night.  The image section keywords all assume a 1-bias, like IRAF,
not like IDL with assumes a 0-bias.  All the KCWI software accounts for
this difference, so don't make these values below 0-biased.  There is one
set of these per amplifier with the number at the end of the keyword
corresponding to the specific amplifier.  The amplifiers are numbered 1 to
4 in a counterclockwise order starting from the lower left corner of the
CCD.

ASECn		the image section that was read out with Amp n
		this includes overscan and should already be set for CWI
BSECn		the image section for calculating the overscan bias
CSECn		the image section for the active CCD region
TSECn		the image section to trim to (same as CSEC1)
GAINn		the gain in electrons/DN for Amp n

Another set of keywords that are very important for nod-and-shuffle
observations define the science and background regions on the CCD.
Remember, make these keywords 1-biased as they will be converted to
0-biased by the pipeline which assumes they are 1-biased.  It is OK to set
these for all images.  They will be ignored for non nod-and-shuffle
observations.  Canonical values for these keywords are given in
'hdrfix_example.txt' and 'allhdr.txt'.

NSSKYR0		the beginning row for the sky portion of the CCD
NSSKYR1		the ending row for the sky portion of the CCD
NSOBJR0		the beginning row for the object portion of the CCD
NSOBJR1		the ending row for the sky portion of the CCD

The next set also impact the basic reductions and should be the same
for an entire run, or at least for a given night.

NVIDINP		this is a Keck standard and is the number of amps used to
		read out the image
CCDSUM		this is the binning of the image encoded as a string with
		the x-binning and the y-binning separated by an underscore:
		e.g. '2_2' indicates two by two binning.

These will be the same for a given run and are already included in
allhdr.txt.  You will be prompted to change the OBSERVER value to your name.

OBSERVER	your name (prompted)
TELESCOPE	Hale5m
INSTRUME	CWI

The next set may change for each observation and are not recorded in the
*.info files.  You will be prompted for the image range designating the
following types of images: 1) images taken with the nod-and-shuffle mask 
deployed, and 2) sky observations

NASMASK		T or F: was the nod-and-shuffle mask deployed?

SHFFSTAT	0 (OK) or 1 (ABORTED): the nod-and-shuffle exposure status.
		This is checked by the DRP and appropriate action will be
		taken.

SKYOBS		T or F: was this a sky observation?  This will be important
		for doing non nod-and-shuffle sky subtraction.

The next set are derived in the CWI_FORMAT_INFO procedure so you don't need
to edit them, but they should be spot-checked for accuracy.

IMGTYPE  	must be one of: object, bias, dark, cbars, arc, cflat, arcbars,
		or dflat.  'test' or 'image' is used to designate focus 
		images or other images that are ordinarily not processed.

IMGNUM		the image number (actually set by CWI_FIX_HEADERS).

MMPPOS		the encoder position for the periscope
FOCPOS		the encoder position for the focus stage
FM4POS		the encoder position for the FM4 fold mirror
GRATPOS		the encoder position for the grating stage
CAMPOS		the encoder position for the camera stage

SHUFFMOD	T or F: was charge shuffled during the exposure?

OBJECT		the name of the object being observed.  This is important
		for labeling and should be set for object images.  Not
		required for calibration images (except sky images).

TARGRA,TARGDEC	telescope coords in decimal degress of science target for 
		nod-and-shuffle observations
BACKRA,BACKDEC	telescope coords in decimal degress of background field for
		nod-and-shuffle observations
RA,DEC		telescope coords in decimal degrees for normal observations
ROTPA		the cassegraine rotator position angle

EXPTIME		exposure time in seconds.  This is only needed for 
		nod-and-shuffle observations.  For other CWI images, 
		it will already be correct in the image header.

DATE		the UT date of the observation.  This is already set for
		CWI data

Derived keywords are below:

GRATID		the grating id, either RED or BLUE (calculated from FM4POS)
FILTER		the filter id, either RED or BLUE (calculated from FM4POS)

CWAVE		this is calculated in CWI_FIX_HEADERS with 
		CWI_CENTRAL_WAVE from the grating ID and the CAMPOS value 
		and is very useful during the wavelength solution
		derivation.  Be sure to check the GRATID for each observation
		before running CWI_FIX_HEADERS.


2. Creating hdrfix.txt:

Now, one simply changes directory into the raw data dir and runs IDL and
executes the CWI_FORMAT_INFO program:

> cd raw/
> idl
IDL> cwi_format_info

This program will ask you to enter the observer's last name (no spaces).

If the file 'allhdr.txt' from the kderp distribution can be found (see
!CWI_DATA section of AAAREADME), it is included automatically at the
beginning and includes all the CCD geometry and basic run keywords.  If it
can't find 'allhdr.txt', it will warn you and you can add it by hand.
Modify these keyword values to suit your individual case (different
binning, different CCD geometry, etc.).

The program will then ask you to specify image number ranges for the sky
observations.  This is where good logs will be helpful.  Next it will ask
for the image numbers for good twilight flats, to be used for relative
response calibration.  Don't include weak twilight flats: only the ones you
think have good signal.  Dome flats can also be used for this calibration,
so don't worry if you don't have any good twilight flats.  Next it will ask
for the number range for the nod-and-shuffle mask.  Give the image number
range for when the nod-and-shuffle mask is in place, regardless of any
charge shuffling (the keyword for which is set automatically).  If the
nod-and-shuffle mask was used, it will then ask for the image number range
specifying any nod-and-shuffle observations that were aborted during the
script.  In turn, if there were any aborted, it will then ask for the image
number range of any that aborted while observing the sky.  These conditions
require special processing.

This will generate a hdrfix.txt file in the current directory that is the
starting point for creating the final, master version.

The hdrfix.txt file that is read in by CWI_FIX_HEADERS has five columns:

Column 1: KEYWORD	this is the header keyword to update or add
Column 2: VALUE		this is the value for the keyword in column 1
Column 3: TYPE		this is the IDL type code for the input:
			1 - for bytes
			2 - for integers
			3 - for long integers
			4 - for reals
			5 - for doubles
			7 - for strings
			other types are illegal
Column 4: AFTER		the keyword after which to insert a new keyword
			must set to '-' if location not specified
Column 5: IMGNOS	the range list of image numbers, examples are:
			6972-7083
			7040,7046,7055,7057,7069,7071
			*
			Any mix of ranges using a dash in between and
			individual images using a comma in between
			The '*' means apply to all images
			IMPORTANT: use no spaces in these lists!

Most of the required keywords will be generated from the *.info files by
CWI_FORMAT_INFO.

Once the hdrfix.txt file is correct and you have double-checked it, you can
run idl and start the program that modifies the headers.  If no file is
specified, it will ask for you to enter the hdrfix.txt filename.  You can
also set the /verbose keyword to get extra output:

> idl
IDL> cwi_fix_headers,'hdrfix.txt',/verbose

If all goes well, you should be able to run the KCWI pipeline on these
images.  To allow recovery, it is good idea to copy the raw images to a
working directory and alter the headers there.  That way if something goes
wrong, you can just re-copy over the images and start again.

---NEW---

In order to facilitate the new kcwi_quick.pro procedure, there have been some
changes made to CWI_FORMAT_INFO and CWI_FIX_HEADERS that make incremental
updating of the headers more reasonable.  In summary, the CWI_FORMAT_INFO has
an 'update' keyword that allows you to re-use the 'hdrfix.txt' file and just
add records for new images.  The CWI_FIX_HEADERS procedure will now only
apply changes to new images, unless overridden by its new 'update' keyword.

Therefore, at the telescope you can copy the current set of images (and
their associated *.info files) and run CWI_FORMAT_INFO to generate a new
'hdrfix.txt' file.  You can run CWI_FIX_HEADERS normally to update these
images with keywords that allow you to reduce the images with the KCWI
DRP.  After you have taken more images, you can re-run CWI_FORMAT_INFO with
the 'update' keyword set, which will re-use the 'hdrfix.txt' file you already
generated and just add header keyword update records for the new images.  It
will ask you questions about each new image that determine the configuration
and processing and indicate if the image was a sky observation, if the N&S
mask was in, if it was a N&S observation, was it aborted and if it was
aborted, was it aborted while observing the sky.  When this is done and you
run CWI_FIX_HEADERS, it will only update the new image headers.

Alternately, you can just generate a fresh 'hdrfix.txt' file each time by
leaving off the 'update' keyword from the call to CWI_FORMAT_INFO.

For more information on the kcwi_quick.pro routine see the AAAREADME file
under section 4, "NEW FEATURES".
